MSC3440: Threading via `m.thread` relation (#3440)
matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals: proposals/3440-threading-via-relations.md

  "rel_type": "m.thread",
  "event_id": "$thread_root"
}
```
Where $thread_root is the event ID of the root message in the thread.

A big advantage of relations over quote replies is that they can be server-side aggregated. It means that a client is not bound to download the entire history of a room to have a comprehensive list of events being part of a thread.

It will have a custom aggregation  which is a summary of the thread: the latest message, a list of participants and the total count of messages. I.e. in places which include bundled relations (per [MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675)), the thread root would include additional information in the `unsigned` field:

```json
{
  "latest_event": {
    "content": { ... },
    ...
  },
  "senders": ["@john:example.com", ...],
  "count": 7
}
```

#### Quote replies in a thread 

No recommendation to modifying quote replies is made, this would still be handled via the `m.in_reply_to` field of `m.relates_to`. Thus you could quote a reply in a thread:

```json
"m.relates_to": {
    "rel_type": "m.thread",
    "event_id": "$thread_root",
    "m.in_reply_to": {
        "event_id": "$event_target"
    }
}

> ```

Reviewer: Nheko does implement MSC3051 and `im.nheko.relations.v1.in_reply_to`, which is a more compatible alternative to MSC3267 btw since Jan 28, 2021, if anyone is interested in that.

> ```

Author: I do not believe that this proposal makes the current situation any worse, or will make the adoption of MSC3267 or MSC3051 any more difficult.
My understanding is that those MSC will have to come up with a certain level or backwards compability to be adopted and when that does happen, threads will be able to adopt this new event format.

I suggest to leave things as is and revisit the problem once a consensus is reached

### Fetch all replies to a thread

To fetch an entire thread, the `/relations` API can be used as defined in 
[MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675)

```
GET /_matrix/client/unstable/rooms/!room_id:domain/relations/$thread_root/m.thread
```

Where `$thread_root` is the event ID of the root message in the thread.

In order to properly display a thread it is necessary to retrieve the relations 
to threaded events, e.g. the reactions to the threaded events. This proposes 
clarifying [MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675) that 
the `/relations` API includes bundled relations. This follows what MSC2675 already describes:

> Any API which receives events should bundle relations (apart from non-gappy 
incremental syncs), for instance: initial sync, gappy incremental sync, 
/messages and /context.

### Fetch all threads in a room

To fetch all threads in a room it is proposed to use the 
[`/messages`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/latest#get-matrix-client-r0-rooms-roomid-messages) 
API and expand the room event filtering to include relations. The `RoomEventFilter` 

> will take additional parameters:

Reviewer 2: This also might point to the need for more sophisticated server-to-server APIs for relations so the server could get enough context from other servers to send the summaries to its clients.

> will take additional parameters:

Reviewer 3: Maybe, but right now things like the `/relations` API ensure that you can view a message in order to view the relations to it, we're somewhat breaking that here?

Usually it wouldn't matter (what use is seeing reactions if you can't see the original message), but in here you *would* still be able to see the thread. Unless we define it as you can't...

> * `relation_types`: A list of relation types which must be bundled with the event 
> to include it. If this list is absent then no filtering is done on relation types.
> * `relation_senders`: A list of senders of relations...

Reviewer 3: These don't seem worded clearly (and the second one i think we just forgot to finish).

```suggestion
* `relation_types`: A list of relation types which must be exist pointing to the event
  being filtered. If this list is absent then no filtering is done on relation types.
* `relation_senders`: A list of senders of relations which must be exist pointing to
  the event being filtered. If this list is absent then no filtering is done on relation types.
```

I'm not sure that's necessarily an improvement, but I think it is more accurate

Reviewer 2: "which must be exist"?

This can also be combined with the `sender` field to search for threads which a 
user has participated in (or not participated in).

```

> GET /_matrix/client/unstable/rooms/!room_id:domain/messages/filter=...

Reviewer 2: `/filter` or `?filter`?

Reviewer 3: Should be `?filter=`, it is the existing query string parameter for the endpoint!

```

> Where filter would be JSON and URL-encoded string include the above new fields:

Reviewer 2: Not sure this is a sentence... maybe at least an 'and', but it also sounds like your specifying that filter is json & urlencoded rather than just reminding us that this is already how it is. Also would suggest a 'for example' to make it clear you're giving an example of how the above would be used.

Maybe something like:

The filter string would include the new fields, above. In this example, the URL encoded JSON is presented unencoded and formatted for legibility:

```json
{
  "types": ["m.room.message"],
  "relation_senders": [...],
  "relation_types": ["m.thread"]
}
```

> ### Limitations

Reviewer 4: Dave's [message above](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3440#discussion_r746812037) covers the same ground, and includes a suggested fix, so feel free to resolve my thread here in favour of his if you like.

#### Read receipts

Read receipts and read markers assume a single chronological timeline. Threading 
changes that assumption making the current API not very practical.

> Clients can synthetize read receipts but it is possible that some notification get 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clients can synthetize read receipts but it is possible that some notifications get 
```

Reviewer 2: Also I'm not really sure what you mean by, "clients can synthesize read receipts" here, or how that would work?

Author: The `matrix-js-sdk` does make some assumption about read receipt. If the SDK receives a typing notification before it receives a `m.receipt` event, it will then assume that this user has read the room and will locally update the read receipt. And this seems to be called `synthesizedReceipts`.

We can do a lot of the heavy lifting on the SDK until Synapse has better support for threads

Reviewer 2: It's news to me that it did this based on typing notifications, but OK - I see what you mean.

own challenges and is probably undesirable at this stage. The preferred route 
would be to create another MSC to make read receipts support multiple timelines 
in a single room.

#### Single-layer event aggration

Bundling only includes relations a single-layer deep. This MSC is not looking to
solve nested threading but is rather focusing on bringing mechanisms to allow
threading in chat applications

Nested threading is out of scope for this proposal and would be the subject of
a different MSC.
A `m.thread` event can only reference events that do not have a `rel_type`

```
[
  {
    "event_id": "ev1",
    ...
  },
  {
    "event_id": "ev2",
    ...
    "m.relates_to": {
      "rel_type": "m.thread",
      "event_id": "ev1",
      "m.in_reply_to": {
          "event_id": "ev1"
      }
    }
  },
  {
    "event_id": "ev3",
    ...
    "m.relates_to": {
      "rel_type": "m.annotation",
      "event_id": "ev1",
      "key": "✅"
    }
  }
]
```

Given the above list of events, only `ev1` would be a valid target for an `m.thread`
relation event.

### Client considerations

#### Display "m.thread" as "m.in_reply_to"

> It is possible for clients to provide a backwards compatible experience for users 

Reviewer 2: I would probably expand this out a little by starting off with default backwards compat behaviour, then introducing how clients can use replies, for example (assuming I've got this right):

"Clients that don't support threads will render threaded messages in the room's timeline at the point at which they were sent. This does risk a confusing experience for those on such clients, but options to mitigate this are limited.

Having older clients treat threaded messages as replies would give a better experience, but adding reply metadata in addition to thread metadata would mean replies could not then be used in threads and would be significant extra metadata.

Clients that wish to offer basic thread support can display threads as replies to the thread root message. See https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-react-sdk/pull/7109 for an example."

scalable relation format described in [MSC3051](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3051).

### Threads as rooms

The provides full server-side APIs for navigating trees of events, and could be 
considered an extension of this MSC for scenarios which require that capability 
(e.g. Twitter-style microblogging as per [Cerulean](https://matrix.org/blog/2020/12/18/introducing-cerulean), 
or building an NNTP or IMAP or Reddit style threaded UI)

"Threads as rooms" is the idea that each thread could just get its own Matrix room 
in parallel with the one which spawned the thread.

Advantages to "Threads as rooms" include:
 * May be simpler for client implementations.
 * Also requires minimal Client-Server API changes

Disadvantages include:
 * Access control, membership, history visibility, room versions etc needs to be 
 synced between the thread-room and the parent room
 * Harder to control lifetime of threads in the context of the parent room if 
 they're completely split off
 * Clients which aren't aware of them are going to fill up with a lot of rooms.
 * Bridging to non-threaded chat systems is trickier as you may have to splice 
 together rooms

>  * The sheer number of rooms involved probably makes it dependent on `/sync` v3 

Reviewer 2: @kegsay does this look better now?

>  * The sheer number of rooms involved probably makes it dependent on `/sync` v3 

Reviewer 5: I don't really think Threads As Rooms should even exist as an alternative as it's solving a different problem. One is solving "how do you emulate Twitter" and one is "how do you do threads in a group chat".  Sure they both _involve_ threads but I don't think that's enough rationale to compare them as it makes some pros/cons nonsensical. For example, the difficulty syncing ACLs between thread rooms is _intentional_ for the Cerulean use case, but would be completely crazy for Element to do as it wants threads to all form part of a single group chat.

Other than that, the points on MSC2836 seem reasonable, albeit slightly biased:
 - arbitrary width/depth on threads can be seen as a pro or a con
 - whilst MSC2836 doesn't explicitly handle editing/reactions, the proposal composes well with those features (editing a thread reply or reacting to it will behave in the same way as any other event).
 - it's the only proposal which actually works over federation reliably.

On that last point, I would recommend that we at least mention in this MSC that we considered the complexities of federation and consciously decided to punt it as per:

> There's no question we need a federation API for this to work sensibly, but I think the point here is just that it should be up to MSC2675 (or maybe even another, separate MSC) to solve that problem - we should consider this MSC just as how to do threads assuming that MSC2675 lays the foundations.

I still feel that punting it is a mistake as it will make threads when they land on Element for realsies feel flakey for federated users, but that's not my call to make.

experience, but adding reply metadata in addition to thread metadata would mean 
replies could not then be used in threads and would be significant extra metadata.

Clients that wish to offer basic thread support can display threads as replies to 
the thread root message. See matrix-org/matrix-react-sdk#7109 for an example.

#### Sending `m.thread` before fully implementing threads

Clients that do not support threads yet should include a `m.thread` relation to the 
event body if a user is replying to an event that has an `m.thread` relation type

This is done so that clients that support threads can render the event in the most 
relevant context.

If a client does not include that relation type to the outgoing event, it will be 
rendered in the room timeline with a quote reply that should open and highlight the 
event in the thread context when clicked.

When replying to the following event, a client that does not support thread should 
copy in `rel_type` and `event_id` properties in their reply mixin.

```
{
  ...
  "m.relates_to": {
    "rel_type": "m.thread",
    "event_id": "ev1"
  }
}
```

## Alternatives

> [MSC2836](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2836), "Threading as rooms", 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[MSC2836](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2836), "Threading as rooms", and 
```

building on `m.in_reply_to` are the main alternatives here. The first two are 
non-overlapping with this MSC.

It is also worth noting that relations in this MSC could be expressed using the 
scalable relation format described in [MSC3051](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3051).

### Threads as rooms

> The provides full server-side APIs for navigating trees of events, and could be 

Reviewer 2: The what? :)

# MSC3440 Threading via `m.thread` relation

## Problem

Threading is a great way to create alternative timelines to group messages related 
to each other. This is particularly useful in high traffic rooms where multiple 
conversations can happen in parallel or when a single discussion might stretch 
over a very long period of time.

The main goal when implementing threads is to create conversations that are easier 
to follow and smoother to read.

There have been several experiments in threading for Matrix...

 - [MSC2326](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2326): 
 Label based filtering
 - [MSC2836](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2836): 
 Threading by serverside traversal of relationships
 - "Threads as rooms"

>  - Building threads off `m.in_reply_to`

Author: Removing all references to other experiments here as they are talked about in the alternatives section later in this document

Meanwhile, threading is very clearly a core requirement for any modern messaging 
solution, and Matrix uptake is suffering due to the lack of progress.

## Proposal

### Event format

A new relation would be used to express that an event belongs to a thread.

```json
"m.relates_to": {
  "rel_type": "m.thread",
  "event_id": "$thread_root"
}
```
Where $thread_root is the event ID of the root message in the thread.

A big advantage of relations over quote replies is that they can be server-side 
aggregated. It means that a client is not bound to download the entire history of 

> a room to have a comprehensive list of events being part of a thread.

Reviewer 3: This should potentially go in the alternatives section?

When a thread head is aggregated (as in MSC2675), returns a summary of the thread: 
the latest message, a list of participants and the total count of messages. 
I.e. in places which include bundled relations (per 
[MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675)), the thread root 
would include additional information in the `unsigned` field:

```json
{
  "latest_event": {
    "content": { ... },
    ...
  },
  "count": 7,
  "current_user_participated": true
}
```

* `latest_event`: A reference to the last `m.thread` relation part of the thread
* `count`: An integer counting the number of `m.thread` events
* `current_user_participated`: A flag set to `true` if the current logged in user

>   has participated in the thread

Reviewer 3: I don't think having the `current_user_participated` is necessary after further conversations.

#### Quote replies in a thread 

No recommendation to modifying quote replies is made, this would still be handled 
via the `m.in_reply_to` field of `m.relates_to`. Thus you could quote a reply in a thread:

```json
"m.relates_to": {
    "rel_type": "m.thread",
    "event_id": "$thread_root",
    "m.in_reply_to": {
        "event_id": "$event_target"
    }
}
```

It is possible that an `m.in_reply_to` event targets an event that is outside the
related thread. Clients should always do their upmost to display the quote-reply

> and upon clicking it the event should be displayed and highlighted in its original context.

Author: Thank you for bringing this up!

I reviewed the behaviour an I agree with the conclusion that you came to. An event that has `m.in_reply_to` but no `rel_type:m.thread` should be display in the room, and Element should not try to be smart and display that message in a thread.
This will only be done if clients that do not fully support thread decide to attach the new relation. This will open the door to have a reply in the main timeline targetting a threaded event in case one wants to advertise a piece of the conversation to a wider audience.

A `m.thread` event can only reference events that do not have a `rel_type`

```
[
  {
    "event_id": "ev1",
    ...
  },
  {
    "event_id": "ev2",
    ...
    "m.relates_to": {
      "rel_type": "m.thread",
      "event_id": "ev1",
      "m.in_reply_to": {
          "event_id": "ev1"
      }
    }
  },
  {
    "event_id": "ev3",
    ...
    "m.relates_to": {
      "rel_type": "m.annotation",
      "event_id": "ev1",
      "key": "✅"
    }
  }
]
```

Given the above list of events, only `ev1` would be a valid target for an `m.thread`
relation event.

### Client considerations

#### Display "m.thread" as "m.in_reply_to"

Clients that don't support threads will render threaded messages in the room's 
timeline at the point at which they were sent. This does risk a confusing experience 
for those on such clients, but options to mitigate this are limited.

Having older clients treat threaded messages as replies would give a better 
experience, but adding reply metadata in addition to thread metadata would mean 
replies could not then be used in threads and would be significant extra metadata.

Clients that wish to offer basic thread support can display threads as replies to 

> the thread root message. See matrix-org/matrix-react-sdk#7109 for an example.

Reviewer 6: This turns out to be a *very* confusing/disruptive user experience. The spec traditionally doesn't involve itself with user experience (particularly fallbacks) in this way, so would leave it as an implementation detail for how to handle threads-but-disabled behaviour.

Author: @turt2live what would you suggest instead? I'm happy to remove the reference to the pull request, but I believe it's quite important to offer an alternative to clients/bridges developer who might not have the bandwidth to fully support threads straight away

Reviewer 7: In my opinion, showing all of them as a reply to the root makes no sense. You are not replying to the root in that sense, but much rather on other comments within the thread.

To humans, threads UX is much closer to reply chains - so much so that this has been considered for implementation. This is still the case even with this alternative way of implementing them.

Just ignoring the thread info entirely seems fairly reasonable if you don't want to implement threads, so turt2live's suggestion to leave it out seems okay to me. The most disruptive behaviour possible I imagine would be one thread "participant" without a thread-aware client would be posting seemingly out-of-context messages to the main timeline (unless they're normal replies, which should be fallbacked to the thread by thread-aware clients). There isn't really a way around this, even with the current reply-to-root fallback, since I might just post a normal not-reply.

You either implement threads, or you don't.

Reviewer 8: I also dislike the fallback behaviour being to show replies to the root - it's really disconcerting and confusing, given it is simply not a reply to the root.  One alternative could be to include a reply to the previous message in the thread, but flag the in_reply_to somehow as a fallback so that threads-capable clients can distinguish it from a 'real' reply within the thread.  To avoid this MSC getting stuck, we could punt this to another one, though, and instead ship without fallbacks.

Reviewer 9: My two cents: I tentatively agree we should omit recommending spending time on workarounds to client implementors, especially if the results are not a huge improvement on offering no workaround at all. It is a substantially better outcome for the ecosystem if clients jump straight to a "real" implementation rather than a period of in-between-ness.

I suggest simply stating the facts:

> Clients without any support for threads will render threaded messages in the room's 
timeline at the point at which they were sent, without visible linkage with previous messages in the thread. 

> Given the likely prevalence of threads in matrix if this proposal is accepted, most clients will need to rapidly add at least basic support for rendering threaded messages.

Reviewer 10: Why can't the fallback be a reply chain and the threading information just sugar on top by adding new keys to determine if a root event is a thread and if a reply in the chain is an in-thread reply? That keeps non-threading clients very usable as you can follow the chain but threading clients can render them much better.

If this goes forward without a good fallback there will be _a lot_ of confusion and I don't see there being an exceptionally good reason stated anywhere why existing/old clients need to be broken (visually) instead of using a proper reply chain fallback.

Reviewer 6: My suggestion is mostly in line with @novocaine's. Adding a fallback feels like it adds unnecessary weight and delay to this MSC as it effectively limits threads to text messages (fallbacks prevent rich media, and solving that is very out of scope in my view).

Instead, we can push the feature ahead and get it implemented in as many places as we can - conversations will look a bit confusing on unimplemented clients, but I personally think the damage of excessive replies is worse (and falling back to the root even worse than that). Clients which want to support a "threads disabled" sort of feature can choose to render them as replies without this MSC requiring that.

Reviewer 6: also, for the record, somewhere there is a request to have a way to disable threads in a given room - this is more able to solve the client fallback concerns, I think. Rooms which are known to have outdated/incompatible clients (or bridges) can just disable threads.

Author: The reply chain fallback has been implemented in the React SDK. https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-react-sdk/pull/7565

Feedback appreciated, and will mark this conversation as resolved

event in the thread context when clicked.

When replying to the following event, a client that does not support thread should 
copy in `rel_type` and `event_id` properties in their reply mixin.

```
{
  ...
  "m.relates_to": {
    "rel_type": "m.thread",
    "event_id": "ev1"
  }
}
```

## Alternatives

[MSC2836](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2836), "Threading as rooms", and 
building on `m.in_reply_to` are the main alternatives here. The first two are 
non-overlapping with this MSC.

It is also worth noting that relations in this MSC could be expressed using the 
scalable relation format described in [MSC3051](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3051).

### Threads as rooms

Threads as rooms could provide full server-side APIs for navigating trees of events, 
and could be considered an extension of this MSC for scenarios which require that 
capability  (e.g. Twitter-style microblogging as per 
[Cerulean](https://matrix.org/blog/2020/12/18/introducing-cerulean), or building 
an NNTP or IMAP or Reddit style threaded UI)

"Threads as rooms" is the idea that each thread could just get its own Matrix room..

Advantages to "Threads as rooms" include:

>  * May be simpler for client implementations.

Reviewer 9: Either all bullet points should end with a . or none of them should

The rationale for using a new relation type instead of building on `m.in_reply_to` 
is to re-use the event relationship APIs provided by 
[MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675). The MSC3267 definition 
of `m.reference` relationships could be updated to mention threads (perhaps by 
using the key field from [MSC2677](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2677) 
as the thread ID), but it is clearer to define a new relation type. It is unclear 
what impact this would have on [MSC3267](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3267), 
but that is unimplemented by clients.

## Security considerations

None

## Unstable prefix

Clients and servers should use list of unstable prefixes listed below while this 
MSC has not been included in a spec release.

  * `io.element.thread` should be used in place of `m.thread` as relation type
  * `io.element.relation_senders` should be used in place of `relation_senders` 
  in the `RoomEventFilter`
  * `io.element.relation_types` should be used in place of `relation_types` 
  in the `RoomEventFilter`

## Dependencies

This MSC builds on [MSC2674](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674) 

> and [MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675) (which at the 

Reviewer 9: Needs updating

 want "simple" threading.
 * Does not consider use cases like editing or reactions

### Threads via m.in_reply_to

The rationale for using a new relation type instead of building on `m.in_reply_to` 
is to re-use the event relationship APIs provided by 
[MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675). The MSC3267 definition 
of `m.reference` relationships could be updated to mention threads (perhaps by 
using the key field from [MSC2677](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2677) 
as the thread ID), but it is clearer to define a new relation type. It is unclear 
what impact this would have on [MSC3267](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3267), 
but that is unimplemented by clients.

## Security considerations

None

## Unstable prefix

Clients and servers should use list of unstable prefixes listed below while this 
MSC has not been included in a spec release.

  * `io.element.thread` should be used in place of `m.thread` as relation type
  * `io.element.relation_senders` should be used in place of `relation_senders` 
  in the `RoomEventFilter`
  * `io.element.relation_types` should be used in place of `relation_types` 

>   in the `RoomEventFilter`

Reviewer 11: for future reference: it's generally helpful if unstable identifiers can include the msc number (eg `io.element.msc3440.thread`), just to help flag them as unstable, and to help with namespacing.

Author: This conversation came up in other channels to, mentioning that we could have used `org.matrix.msc3440`. In hindsight we should have done this, but given how far ahead this MSC already is, we are probably going to keep the types as they are currently defined and will use the `org.matrix.mscxxx` convention

* `relation_senders`: A list of senders of relations which must exist pointing to
  the event being filtered. If this list is absent then no filtering is done on relation types.

This can also be combined with the `sender` field to search for threads which a 
user has participated in (or not participated in).

```
GET /_matrix/client/unstable/rooms/!room_id:domain/messages?filter=...
```

The filter string would include the new fields, above. In this example, the URL 
encoded JSON is presented unencoded and formatted for legibility:

```jsonc
{
  "types": ["m.room.message"],
  "relation_senders": [
    // ...
  ],
  "relation_types": ["m.thread"]
}
```

### Server capabilities

Threads might have sporadic support across servers, to simplify feature 
detections for clients, a homeserver must return a capability entry for threads.

```jsonc
{
  "capabilities": {
    // ...
    "m.thread": {
      "enabled": true
    }
  }
}
```

### Limitations

#### Read receipts

Read receipts and read markers assume a single chronological timeline. Threading 
changes that assumption making the current API not very practical.

> Clients can synthetize read receipts but it is possible that some notifications get 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Clients can synthesize read receipts but it is possible that some notifications get 
```

That said, i don't really understand what this paragraph is saying... which notifs get lost?

relevant context.

If a client does not include that relation type to the outgoing event, it will be 
rendered in the room timeline with a quote reply that should open and highlight the 
event in the thread context when clicked.

When replying to the following event, a client that does not support thread should 
copy in `rel_type` and `event_id` properties in their reply mixin.

```jsonc
{
  // ...
  "m.relates_to": {
    "rel_type": "m.thread",
    "event_id": "ev1"
  }
}
```

## Alternatives

[MSC2836](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2836), "Threading as rooms", and 
building on `m.in_reply_to` are the main alternatives here. The first two are 
non-overlapping with this MSC.

It is also worth noting that relations in this MSC could be expressed using the 
scalable relation format described in [MSC3051](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3051).

### Threads as rooms

Threads as rooms could provide full server-side APIs for navigating trees of events, 
and could be considered an extension of this MSC for scenarios which require that 
capability  (e.g. Twitter-style microblogging as per 

> [Cerulean](https://matrix.org/blog/2020/12/18/introducing-cerulean), or building 

Reviewer 8: This may be my fault, but Cerulean is not really threads-as-rooms - instead it's threads-as-arbitrarily-deep-relations within the same room (either a user-timeline room or a thread-room), with the idea of symlinks to factor out the same event across multiple rooms.  The fact a given thread of messages ends up in a single room is kinda irrelevant relative to the idea that you navigate by relationships as per MSC2836.

 * Relationships are queried using `/event_relationships` which is outside the 
 bounds of the `/sync` API so lacks the nice things /sync gives you (live updates). 
 That being said, the event will come down `/sync`, you just may not have the 
 context required to see parents/siblings/children.
 * Threads can be of arbitrary width (unlimited direct replies to a single message) 
 and depth (unlimited chain of replies) which complicates UI design when you just 
 want "simple" threading.
 * Does not consider use cases like editing or reactions

### Threads via m.in_reply_to

The rationale for using a new relation type instead of building on `m.in_reply_to` 
is to re-use the event relationship APIs provided by 
[MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675). The MSC3267 definition 
of `m.reference` relationships could be updated to mention threads (perhaps by 
using the key field from [MSC2677](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2677) 
as the thread ID), but it is clearer to define a new relation type. It is unclear 
what impact this would have on [MSC3267](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3267), 
but that is unimplemented by clients.

> ## Security considerations

Author: I am not aware of anything like that, but I'd be interested in hearing @clokep 's take on this before closing this thread

> ## Security considerations

Reviewer 3: By malformed events I'm assuming you mean a malformed relations reference. I don't think this should cause issues:

* The Client-Server API will reject these as an invalid event.
* For events received over federation, the relation will be ignored if it does not contain valid data.

Each individual event is handled separately (and they all reference the root) so I don't think a bad event could cause subsequent events to be impacted.

# MSC3440 Threading via `m.thread` relation

## Problem

> Threading allows users to branch out a new conversation from the main timeline of a room.
> to each other. This is particularly useful in high traffic rooms where multiple 

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
Threading allows users to branch out a new conversation from the main timeline of a room
to each other. This is particularly useful in high traffic rooms where multiple 
```

to follow and smoother to read.
Threading is very clearly a core requirement for any modern messaging 
solution, and Matrix uptake is suffering due to the lack of progress.

## Proposal

### Event format

A new relation type m.thread expresses that an event belongs to a thread.

```json
"m.relates_to": {
  "rel_type": "m.thread",
  "event_id": "$thread_root"
}
```
Where $thread_root is the event ID of the root message in the thread.

When a thread head is aggregated (as in MSC2675), it returns a summary of the thread: 
the latest message, a list of participants and the total count of messages. 
I.e. in places which include bundled relations (per 
[MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675)), the thread root 
would include additional information in the `unsigned` field:

```jsonc
{
  "latest_event": {
    "content": {
      // ...
    },
    // ...
  },
  "count": 7,
  "current_user_participated": true
}
```

* `latest_event`: A reference to the last `m.thread` relation part of the thread
* `count`: An integer counting the number of `m.thread` events
* `current_user_participated`: A flag set to `true` if the current logged in user
  has participated in the thread

> #### Quote replies in a thread 

Reviewer 6: These should probably just be called "Rich replies" to match the spec.

Rich replies are still handled via the `m.in_reply_to` field of `m.relates_to`.
However clients should fill in the new `render_in` field with `m.thread` in order
to display that in a thread context.

```json
"m.relates_to": {
    "rel_type": "m.thread",
    "event_id": "$thread_root",
    "m.in_reply_to": {
        "event_id": "$event_target",

>         "render_in": ["m.thread"]

Reviewer 12: What's the rationale of this being an array?

Reviewer 10: AFAIK this allows a tick to be added for "show in room" if you want to show a reply in both a thread and in the room timeline.

Author: It appears that some users would like to have the ability to broadcast a message from a thread to the main timeline. This would be potentially be achieved by passing `"render_in": ["m.thread", "m.room"]`. 

That's not something we are aiming to implement in the first thread release, but this leaves the door open for that scenario

It can be useful to let other room members know about the conclusion of a conversation without them having to open a thread they're not interested in following

Reviewer 7: > ability to broadcast a message from a thread to the main timeline

Shouldn't the `"render_in": [ "m.room"]` be part of the thread's own data - not the reply fallback part - to allow generic thread events be broadcast to the room instead?

I think it probably makes sense to have a list here (it's not complicated and enables flexibility), but in your scenario would that `render_in` still be within the `m.in_reply_to` dict though? Would it be doubling back on the fallback at this point (reply -> thread -> main tl)?

Author: > Shouldn't the "render_in": [ "m.room"] be part of the thread's own data - not the reply fallback part - to allow generic thread events be broadcast to the room instead?

If I understand correctly, you're suggesting to move the rendering hints at the thread relation level. It could look a bit like the following

```jsonc
"m.relates_to": {
  "rel_type": "m.thread",
  "event_id": "$thread_root",
  "m.render_in_room": true,
  "m.display_reply_fallback": true,
  "m.in_reply_to": {
    "event_id": "$event_target"
  }
}
```

Like that we're leaving the `m.in_reply_to` mixin alone and have all the threads concern at that level up

Reviewer 7: Yes either that, or
```json
"m.relates_to": {
  "rel_type": "m.thread",
  "event_id": "$thread_root",
  "m.render_in": ["m.room", "m.thread"],
  "m.display_reply_fallback": true,
  "m.in_reply_to": {
    "event_id": "$event_target"
  }
}
```
However I would agree with richvdh that
> it seems like leaving the entire property out of the spec would also leave the door open

It should work for the current implementation and that feature can be added on later when it's actually designed and decided whether it's going to be a list etc etc

```jsonc
"m.relates_to": {
    "rel_type": "m.thread",
    "event_id": "ev1",
    "m.in_reply_to": {
        "event_id": "last_event_id_in_thread",
    }
  }
```

Historically replies have been limited to text messages due to the legacy fallback
prepended to `formatted_body`. This MSC is dependant on 
[MSC2781](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2781) which strips that 
requirement unlock use of any event type in this context.

### Fetch all relations to a thread root

To fetch an entire thread, the `/relations` API can be used as defined in 
[MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675)

```
GET /_matrix/client/unstable/rooms/!room_id:domain/relations/$thread_root/m.thread
```

Where `$thread_root` is the event ID of the root message in the thread.

> Any API which receives events should bundle relations (apart from non-gappy 
incremental syncs), for instance: initial sync, gappy incremental sync, 
/messages and /context.

### Fetch all threads in a room

To fetch all threads in a room, use the
[`/messages`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/latest#get-matrix-client-r0-rooms-roomid-messages) 

> API and expand the room event filtering to include relations. The `RoomEventFilter` 

Reviewer 9: incomplete sentence?

Reviewer 2: Looks like this was meant to explain that these two new filters are introduced by this MSC, it just needs the sentence finished (although I'm not sure where RoomEventFilters were going to come into the mix)

Reviewer 3: Hopefully c8ffa62e16a09d82c8d3bac266ffb61513772535 clarifies this.

```json
"m.relates_to": {
  "rel_type": "m.thread",
  "event_id": "$thread_root"
}
```
Where $thread_root is the event ID of the root message in the thread.

A big advantage of relations over quote replies is that they can be server-side 
aggregated. It means that a client is not bound to download the entire history of 
a room to have a comprehensive list of events being part of a thread.

When a thread head is aggregated (as in MSC2675), returns a summary of the thread: 
the latest message, a list of participants and the total count of messages. 
I.e. in places which include bundled relations (per 
[MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675)), the thread root 
would include additional information in the `unsigned` field:

```jsonc
{
  "latest_event": {
    "content": {
      // ...
    },
    // ...
  },
  "count": 7,
  "current_user_participated": true
}
```

* `latest_event`: A reference to the last `m.thread` relation part of the thread
* `count`: An integer counting the number of `m.thread` events
* `current_user_participated`: A flag set to `true` if the current logged in user
  has participated in the thread

#### Quote replies in a thread 

> Quote replies are still handled via the `m.in_reply_to` field of `m.relates_to`. However clients should fill in the new `render_in` field with `m.thread` in order to display that in a thread context.

Reviewer 10: Proposing having `m.room` being added in this MSC as well so that "show in room" tick could be implemented within a thread.

I suppose the idea of this list is to allow different display options later but showing the message in the room timeline is a very commonly used feature elsewhere so making it part of the initial MSC would bring the functionality on par with minimal changes.

Author: That is definitely the plan, this parameter is extensible having this feature in mind.
We are currently not looking to implement it for an initial launch hence why this is ommitted from this MSC. But a follow-up spec proposal would be most welcomed here

```json
"m.relates_to": {
    "rel_type": "m.thread",
    "event_id": "$thread_root",
    "m.in_reply_to": {
        "event_id": "$event_target",
        "render_in": ["m.thread"]
    }
}
```

It is possible that an `m.in_reply_to` event targets an event that is outside the
related thread. Clients should always do their upmost to display the quote-reply
and upon clicking it the event should be displayed and highlighted in its original context.

### Backwards compatibility

In order to provide a readable event history for everyone, thread-ready clients

> should attach a `m.in_reply_to` mixin to the event source. It should always reference the latest event in the thread unless a user is explicitely replying to another event.

Reviewer 6: If we're requiring threads to fall back to replies then I'm worried the fallback of replies limits the event types a thread can contain. We'd need to make progress on https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2781 or similar (extensible events version coming soon).

Author: I have implemented this on the React SDK. https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-react-sdk/pull/7565
The pull request keeps the legacy fallback for text messages and other rich replies lose that legacy bringing this on par with #2781 but only in the context of threads

Author: This has been documented in the MSC as part of [`46e1e9b` (#3440)](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3440/commits/46e1e9bf852e72d41fbf28b3f9cf786330866468)

changes that assumption making the current API not very practical.

Clients can synthesize read receipts but it is possible that some notifications get 
lost on a fresh start where the clients have to start off the `m.read` 
information received from the homeserver.

Synchronising the synthesized notification count across devices is out of scope and deferred to a later MSC.

#### Single-layer event aggration

This MSC does not include support for nested threads.

Nested threading is out of scope for this proposal and would be the subject of
a different MSC.
A `m.thread` event can only reference events that do not have a `rel_type`

```jsonc
[
  {
    "event_id": "ev1",
    // ...
  },
  {
    "event_id": "ev2",
    // ...
    "m.relates_to": {
      "rel_type": "m.thread",
      "event_id": "ev1",
      "m.in_reply_to": {
          "event_id": "ev1",
          "render_in": ["m.thread"],
      }
    }
  },
  {
    "event_id": "ev3",
    // ...
    "m.relates_to": {
      "rel_type": "m.annotation",
      "event_id": "ev1",
      "key": "✅"
    }
  }
]
```

Given the above list of events, only `ev1` would be a valid target for an `m.thread`

> relation event.

Author: @uhoreg thank you for the review! We had discussed this but never formalised this in the MSC

I've added a few thoughts regarding how clients and servers should handle this scenario

> relation event.

Reviewer 13: Should servers also ignore the relation when returning results based on relationships?  e.g. if we have event A, and event B references event A as `m.thread`, and event C references event B as `m.thread`, and then the client calls `/messages` with a filter of `{"relation_types": ["m.thread"]}`, should the server omit B, or should it include B and rely on the client noticing that B has its own `m.thread` relation?

> relation event.

Reviewer 3: > Should servers also ignore the relation when returning results based on relationships?

This is also true of bundled aggregations FWIW (although I think that would be pretty trivial to just not try to find threads if you're part of a thread...)

> relation event.

Reviewer 3: For a simpler situation, consider just calling the `/relations` API on event B, in @uhoreg's example -- should that include event C or not?

> relation event.

Author: After discussing this internally we concluded that servers should not attempt to filter anything. This will be left to the client discretion as it could impede extensibility in the future

#### 
### Client considerations

#### Sending `m.thread` before fully implementing threads

Clients that do not support threads yet should include a `m.thread` relation to the 
event body if a user is replying to an event that has an `m.thread` relation type

This is done so that clients that support threads can render the event in the most 
relevant context.

If a client does not include that relation type to the outgoing event, it will be 
rendered in the room timeline with a rich reply that should open and highlight the 
event in the thread context when clicked.

When replying to the following event, a client that does not support thread should 
copy in `rel_type` and `event_id` properties in their reply mixin.

```jsonc
{
  // ...
  "m.relates_to": {
    "rel_type": "m.thread",
    "event_id": "ev1"
  }
}
```

> 

Reviewer 13: Presumably, clients should also add the `"render_in": ["m.thread"]` property, even if they don't fully support threads yet.

# MSC3440 Threading via `m.thread` relation

## Problem

Threading allows users to branch out a new conversation from the main timeline of a room
to each other. This is particularly useful in high traffic rooms where multiple 
conversations can happen in parallel or when a single discussion might stretch 
over a very long period of time.

The main goal of implementing threads is to facilitate conversations that are easier 
to follow and smoother to read.
Threading is very clearly a core requirement for any modern messaging 
solution, and Matrix uptake is suffering due to the lack of progress.

## Proposal

### Event format

A new relation type m.thread expresses that an event belongs to a thread.

```json
"m.relates_to": {
  "rel_type": "m.thread",
  "event_id": "$thread_root"
}
```
Where $thread_root is the event ID of the root message in the thread.

> When a thread head is aggregated (as in MSC2675), it returns a summary of the thread: 

Reviewer 7: head?

Author: We've used either head or root, but will probably change to the latter for consistency

Reviewer 7: :+1: I thought it was supposed to mean the same thing, but this document only mentions root, so it is confusing.

```jsonc
{
  "latest_event": {
    "content": {
      // ...
    },
    // ...
  },
  "count": 7,
  "current_user_participated": true
}
```

* `latest_event`: A reference to the last `m.thread` relation part of the thread
* `count`: An integer counting the number of `m.thread` events
* `current_user_participated`: A flag set to `true` if the current logged in user
  has participated in the thread

#### Rich replies in a thread 

Rich replies are still handled via the `m.in_reply_to` field of `m.relates_to`.
However clients should fill in the new `render_in` field with `m.thread` in order
to display that in a thread context.

```json
"m.relates_to": {
    "rel_type": "m.thread",
    "event_id": "$thread_root",
    "m.in_reply_to": {
        "event_id": "$event_target",
        "render_in": ["m.thread"]
    }
}
```

It is possible that an `m.in_reply_to` event targets an event that is outside the
related thread. Clients should always do their utmost to display the rich reply
and when clicked, the event should be displayed and highlighted in its original context.

A rich reply without `rel_type: m.thread` targeting a thread relation must be

> rendered in the main timeline. This will allow users to advertise threaded messages

Author: Yes that is correct. If an event is missing `rel_type: m.thread` it will be rendered in the main timeline on all clients (threads-ready or not).
I believe this paragraph acknowledges that? What information seems to be missing from your point of view?

> rendered in the main timeline. This will allow users to advertise threaded messages

Reviewer 7: The part that is not stated is the missing forward-compatibility of this design. I'm sure we all would prefer to have it. On a technical level I feel your solution is acceptable in this regard, because to use this fallback, users of non-aware clients would on their own need to know to send a reply when they might send a normal message instead. That means the situation where interpreting a missing `rel_type` differently would be exceptionally rare and can be disregarded.

I think it might be good to state this "flaw" to raise awareness and priority for client developers so they can at least patch their clients to be practically pseudo-forward-compatible and not have a timeline disrupting client. I am not sure how this case is usually handled in spec, I suppose it is rather rare.

> rendered in the main timeline. This will allow users to advertise threaded messages

Author: I've added a few thoughts as part of [`5c04906` (#3440)](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3440/commits/5c04906e1bf84d4d01f2fb5ff9b3251993d08435) regarding this

in the room.

### Backwards compatibility

A thread will be displayed as a chain of replies on clients unaware of threads.

Thread-ready clients should attach a `m.in_reply_to` mixin to the event source. 

> It should always reference the latest event in the thread unless a user is 

Reviewer 6: Currently there's an issue where it can target things like reactions
```suggestion
It should always reference the latest message-like event in the thread unless a user is 
```

Reviewer 7: I think that "message" like should maybe be defined clearly, like
- `m.room.message`
- `m.poll`
- `m.location`?

Author: The issue described by @turt2live above is definitely a client-side implementation issue. The intention was to target only `m.room.message` but I can see your point to extend this to polls, stickers and so on.

This would most likely benefit from being defined somewhere outside this MSC as it is likely this kind of question will come up again in the future and we'd rather not define this behaviour in every spec proposal

over a very long period of time.

The main goal of implementing threads is to facilitate conversations that are easier 
to follow and smoother to read.
Threading is very clearly a core requirement for any modern messaging 
solution, and Matrix uptake is suffering due to the lack of progress.

## Proposal

### Event format

A new relation type (see [MSC2674](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674))
`m.thread` expresses that an event belongs to a thread.

```json
"m.relates_to": {
  "rel_type": "m.thread",
  "event_id": "$thread_root"
}
```
Where $thread_root is the event ID of the root message in the thread.

When a thread root is aggregated (as in MSC2675), it returns a summary of the thread: 
the latest message, a list of participants and the total count of messages. 
I.e. in places which include bundled relations (per 
[MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675)), the thread root 
would include additional information in the `unsigned` field:

```jsonc
{
  "latest_event": {
    "content": {
      // ...
    },
    // ...
  },
  "count": 7,
  "current_user_participated": true
}
```

> * `latest_event`: A reference to the last `m.thread` relation part of the thread

Reviewer 3: > If the full event, how is it formatted? per the [client-server format](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.2/client-server-api/#room-event-format), presumably?

Implementation wise, it just uses whatever the passed serialization format is, but we only include bundled aggregations for the C-S API, so I think it can only be the client event format (or maybe also the application service variant of that?)

> * `latest_event`: A reference to the last `m.thread` relation part of the thread

Reviewer 11: AS and C-S are the same, I think. Note that there are two C-S variants, one with room id, one without.

> * `latest_event`: A reference to the last `m.thread` relation part of the thread

Author: I believe this one includes the `room_id`. I'm not sure I follow the implications of having it or not?

> * `latest_event`: A reference to the last `m.thread` relation part of the thread

Reviewer 11: > I believe this one includes the room_id. I'm not sure I follow the implications of having it or not?

Events returned by `/sync` (and `/notifications`) do not generally include the `room_id`, because someone thought that saving those characters was more important than having a consistent format. See https://spec.matrix.org/v1.2/client-server-api/#get_matrixclientv3sync, which uses `ClientEventWithoutRoomID` rather than the more normal `ClientEvent`. Note that it also applies to "nested" events: `redacted_because` is *also* formatted as a `ClientEventWithoutRoomID` when returned by `/sync`.

So, I'd expect `latest_event` to follow the same pattern as `redacted_because` (ie, it includes a `room_id`, except when it is returned by `/sync`.

Assuming that's what happens, I think all we need to say is:

```suggestion
* `latest_event`: The most recent event which relates to this event, with `rel_type` of `m.thread`.
```

... ideally with a clearer example.

> * `latest_event`: A reference to the last `m.thread` relation part of the thread

Author: Updating the description & example, and have created an issue to update what Synapse returns https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/issues/12085

* `count`: An integer counting the number of `m.thread` events
* `current_user_participated`: A flag set to `true` if the current logged in user
  has participated in the thread

#### Rich replies in a thread 

Rich replies are still handled via the `m.in_reply_to` field of `m.relates_to`.
However clients should fill in the new `render_in` field with `m.thread` in order
to display that in a thread context.

```json
"m.relates_to": {
    "rel_type": "m.thread",
    "event_id": "$thread_root",
    "m.in_reply_to": {
        "event_id": "$event_target",
        "render_in": ["m.thread"]
    }
}
```

It is possible that an `m.in_reply_to` event targets an event that is outside the
related thread. Clients should always do their utmost to display the rich reply
and when clicked, the event should be displayed and highlighted in its original context.

A rich reply without `rel_type: m.thread` targeting a thread relation must be
rendered in the main timeline. This will allow users to advertise threaded messages
in the room.

### Backwards compatibility

A thread will be displayed as a chain of replies on clients unaware of threads.

> To ensure forward-compatiblity on systems that do not support threads, clients

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
To ensure forward-compatibility on systems that do not support threads, clients
```

> are advised to attach the `m.thread` relation to replies that are target an event

Author: Already addressed by Hubert's comment, thank you for the heads up though ❤️

> containing a `m.thread` relation.

Reviewer 11: -> https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3440#discussion_r812890401

```jsonc
"m.relates_to": {
    "rel_type": "m.thread",
    "event_id": "ev1",
    "m.in_reply_to": {
        "event_id": "last_event_id_in_thread",
    }
  }
```

Historically replies have been limited to text messages due to the legacy fallback
prepended to `formatted_body`. This MSC is dependant on 
[MSC3676](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3676) which strips that 
requirement to unlock use of any event type in this context.

### Fetch all relations to a thread root

To fetch an entire thread, the `/relations` API can be used as defined in 
[MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675)

```
GET /_matrix/client/unstable/rooms/!room_id:domain/relations/$thread_root/m.thread
```

Where `$thread_root` is the event ID of the root message in the thread.

> Any API which receives events should bundle relations (apart from non-gappy 
incremental syncs), for instance: initial sync, gappy incremental sync, 
/messages and /context.

### Fetch all threads in a room

To fetch all threads in a room, the
[`/messages`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/latest#get-matrix-client-r0-rooms-roomid-messages) 

> API is used with newly added filtering options. It is proposed to expand the room

Reviewer 3: All of the endpoints support it, yes. This is not specific to the `/messages` endpoint.

> API is used with newly added filtering options. It is proposed to expand the room

Reviewer 11: ok, please could we update the text to say that. It might be better to phrase it as a change to event filters, rather than `/messages`. For example:

> [Event filters](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.2/client-server-api/#filtering) (as used by endpoints including `/messages`, `/sync` and `/context`) are extended with new options to allow filtering events by their relating events:

event filtering to include filtering events by their related events:

* `relation_types`: A list of relation types which must exist pointing to the event

>   being filtered. If this list is absent then no filtering is done on relation types.

Reviewer 3: Correct it is not being proposed to include wildcard support.

* `relation_senders`: A list of senders of relations which must exist pointing to

>   the event being filtered. If this list is absent then no filtering is done on relation types.

Reviewer 11: is `relation_senders` something we actually need? it feels a bit obscure.

Author: Clients are interested in receiving a paginated list of threads that a specific users have participated in.
i.e. I want to find all threads I created or replied to... 

The `senders` filter is not enough as it only looks at the root message

Reviewer 11: > The senders filter is not enough as it only looks at the root message

but so does `relation_senders`, no?

Reviewer 3: `relation_senders` works the same way as `relation_events`, from your [example above](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3440#discussion_r812120346):

> A list of relation senders to include. An event `A` is included in the filter only if there exists another event `B` which relates to `A` with a `sender` which is included in the list

Reviewer 11: makes more sense now, thanks.

This can also be combined with the `sender` field to search for threads which a 
user has participated in (or not participated in).

```

> GET /_matrix/client/unstable/rooms/!room_id:domain/messages?filter=...

Reviewer 11: `/_matrix/client/unstable/rooms/.../messages` isn't a valid endpoint. You may find that some servers expose something there, but it's not in the spec so it may format your harddrive.

```suggestion
GET /_matrix/client/v3/rooms/!room_id:domain/messages?filter=...
```

```

The filter string includes the new fields, above. In this example, the URL 
encoded JSON is presented unencoded and formatted for legibility:

```jsonc
{
  "types": ["m.room.message"],
  "relation_senders": [
    // ...
  ],
  "relation_types": ["m.thread"]
}
```

Note that the newly added filtering parameters return events based on information
in related events. Consider the following events in a room:

* `A`: a `m.room.message` event sent by `alice`
* `B`: a `m.room.message` event sent by `bob` which relates to `A` with type `m.thread`

Using a filter of `"relation_types": ["m.thread"]` would return event `A` as it
has another event which relates to it via `m.thread`.

Similarly, using a filter of `"relation_senders": ["bob"]` would return event `A`

> as it has another event which relates to it sent by `bob`.

Author: This MSC tries to describe the entire feature in one document rather than having multiple MSC describing one specific technical bit in different document
Not entirely convinced that's necesserily the way forward. A t this stage of the review process I would prefer to keep it as is in unless there's a good reason not to

> as it has another event which relates to it sent by `bob`.

Reviewer 11: Yeah, we've had problems in the past with MSCs which combine changes to multiple parts of the protocol (in particular, people got upset that MSC1772 (spaces) introduced the broader concept of a "room type").

As you say though, it's probably best to keep it here now that we are here.

### Server capabilities

Threads might have sporadic support across servers, to simplify feature 

> detections for clients, a homeserver must return a capability entry for threads.

Reviewer 11: Per https://spec.matrix.org/v1.1/client-server-api/#capabilities-negotiation:

> This system should not be used to advertise unstable or experimental features - this is better done by the /versions endpoint.

Author: The idea here is not really to advertise an unstable feature. Clients need this flag to know how much of the heavy lifting they need to do to get threads working.

The other ways I had in mind to probe for threads support are
- Checking whether threads bundled relationship exists, but that only works for limited sync responses
- See whether creating a filter works or not

The `/capabilities` response advertises that the server supports early on and lets clients make specific optimisations they would otherwise not be able to do.

Reviewer 11: This isn't a hill I'm going to die on, but:

> The idea here is not really to advertise an unstable feature

I think it *is* about advertising an unstable feature. You need to know if you're talking to a server which supports this feature which has been added to the spec since the last version (`v1.2`). That is exactly what "advertising an unstable feature" means.

... unless you're proposing that server-side support for threads is going to be optional forever (so clients need to support servers which don't support it forever), which makes it an *optional* feature. But if that's the case, it needs calling out and discussing in the MSC.

> The /capabilities response advertises that the server supports early on and lets clients make specific optimisations they would otherwise not be able to do.

that is also true of `/versions`.

```jsonc
{
  "capabilities": {
    // ...

>     "m.thread": {

Author: Added a new bullet point to the unstable prefixes section

changes that assumption making the current API not very practical.

Clients can synthesize read receipts but it is possible that some notifications get 
lost on a fresh start where the clients have to start off the `m.read` 
information received from the homeserver.

Synchronising the synthesized notification count across devices is out of scope and deferred to a later MSC.

#### Single-layer event aggration

This MSC does not include support for nested threads.

Nested threading is out of scope for this proposal and would be the subject of
a different MSC.
A `m.thread` event can only reference events that do not have a `rel_type`

```jsonc
[
  {
    "event_id": "ev1",
    // ...
  },
  {
    "event_id": "ev2",
    // ...
    "m.relates_to": {
      "rel_type": "m.thread",
      "event_id": "ev1",
      "m.in_reply_to": {
          "event_id": "ev1",
          "render_in": ["m.thread"],
      }
    }
  },
  {
    "event_id": "ev3",
    // ...
    "m.relates_to": {
      "rel_type": "m.annotation",
      "event_id": "ev1",
      "key": "✅"
    }
  }
]
```

Given the above list of events, only `ev1` would be a valid target for an `m.thread`
relation event.

> Invalid thread relations should be rejected with an HTTP `400` status code and a 

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
Servers should reject attempts to send events via the Client-Server API with an HTTP `400` status code and a 
```

... I think?

Reviewer 7: *events with invalid relations

Reviewer 11: thank you

```suggestion
Servers should reject attempts to send events with invalid thread relations via the
Client-Server API with an HTTP `400` status code and a 
```

`M_UNKNOWN` error code.
Events received through federations should be always be accepted without checking
the validity of the relations as it would break the extensibility of this proposal
in a future MSC.

This means that events with invalid thread relations can make their way into the
network, either due by malicious activity or buggy implementation. If a client

> receives such events, they should hide them as soon as it can determine for certain

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
receives such events, they should hide them as soon as they can determine for certain
```

that the associated event is not a valid target.

### Client considerations

#### Sending `m.thread` before fully implementing threads

Clients that do not support threads yet should include a `m.thread` relation to the 

> event body if a user is replying to an event that has an `m.thread` relation type

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
event body if a user is replying to an event that has an `m.thread` relation type.
```

> event body if a user is replying to an event that has an `m.thread` relation type

Author: I probably should update the wording here, but what I meant is that it should copy the relation of the other event, and they both should target the same thread root.

Will try to reword this part

This is done so that clients that support threads can render the event in the most 
relevant context.

If a client does not include that relation type to the outgoing event, it should
be treated as not being part of the thread.  For example, if a client has a
separate area for displaying threads, clients can render the event in the main
room timeline as a rich reply that will open and highlight the event in the
thread context when clicked.

When replying to the following event, a client that does not support thread should 
copy in `rel_type` and `event_id` properties in their reply mixin.

```jsonc
{
  // ...
  "m.relates_to": {
    "rel_type": "m.thread",
    "event_id": "ev1",
    "m.in_reply_to": {
      "event_id": "$event_target",
      "render_in": ["m.thread"]
    }
  }
}
```

## Alternatives

[MSC2836](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2836), "Threading as rooms", and 
building on `m.in_reply_to` are the main alternatives here. The first two are 

> non-overlapping with this MSC.

Reviewer 11: it'd be less confusing if this list of options was in the same order as the headings below.

It is also worth noting that relations in this MSC could be expressed using the 
scalable relation format described in [MSC3051](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3051).

### Threads as rooms

Threads as rooms could provide full server-side APIs for navigating trees of events, 
and could be considered an extension of this MSC for scenarios which require that 
capability  (e.g. Twitter-style microblogging as per 
[Cerulean](https://matrix.org/blog/2020/12/18/introducing-cerulean), or building 

> an NNTP or IMAP or Reddit style threaded UI)

Reviewer 11: I'm struggling with this paragraph.

* I don't really see how it's an extension of this MSC
* As @ara4n says, Cerulean is a poor example of it

`m.thread` expresses that an event belongs to a thread.

```json
"m.relates_to": {
  "rel_type": "m.thread",
  "event_id": "$thread_root"
}
```
Where $thread_root is the event ID of the root message in the thread.

When a thread root is aggregated (as in MSC2675), it returns a summary of the thread: 
the latest message, a list of participants and the total count of messages. 
I.e. in places which include bundled relations (per 
[MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675)), the thread root 
would include additional information in the `unsigned` field:

```jsonc
{
  "latest_event": {
    "content": {
      // ...
    },
    // ...
  },
  "count": 7,
  "current_user_participated": true
}
```

* `latest_event`: The most recent event which relates to this event, with 
  `rel_type` of `m.thread`.
* `count`: An integer counting the number of `m.thread` events
* `current_user_participated`: A flag set to `true` if the current logged in user
  has participated in the thread

#### Rich replies in a thread 

Rich replies are still handled via the `m.in_reply_to` field of `m.relates_to`.
However clients should fill in the new `m.display_reply_fallback` property

> in order to display that in a thread context.

Reviewer: Shouldn't this rather be `m.display_reply`? The fallback specifically means the `<mx-reply>` part of replies and that is not how clients are supposed to display replies, when they support rich replies.

Reviewer 7: Arguably it should be `m.display_reply_in_thread`

Author: Makes sense, the terminology I'm using here is clashing with the `<mx-reply>`. I'll update this

> in order to display that in a thread context.

Reviewer: I think it might be easier, if that property was the other way around. I.e. threads should add `m.hide_reply` if they don't want to hide the reply event. This would add some overhead for every thread event, but I am hoping it would be easier to target with a push rule, so that you can easily suppress a notification from the reply rule in #3664. I don't really have a good solution for notifications with threads though.

Author: Notifications are hard, but we're currently investigating ways to improve that and extend this MSC. So that's definitely something that could be improved, but should be a follow-up to this MSC.

The reason why I didn't go with a generic `show_reply` or `hide_reply` naming is because we will likely add a way to broadcast a thread message to the room timeline, and in that context we will want to display the reply tile as a way to jump to the thread conversation. It would be quite confusing if the event source has a "hide reply" property but clients have to override it.

But going with the `hide_*` over `show_*` might be the way forward!

```json
"m.relates_to": {
    "rel_type": "m.thread",
    "event_id": "$thread_root",
    "m.display_reply_fallback": true,
    "m.in_reply_to": {
        "event_id": "$event_target"
    }
}
```

It is possible that an `m.in_reply_to` event targets an event that is outside the
related thread. Clients should always do their utmost to display the rich reply
and when clicked, the event should be displayed and highlighted in its original context.

A rich reply without `rel_type: m.thread` targeting a thread relation must be
rendered in the main timeline. This will allow users to advertise threaded messages
in the room.

### Backwards compatibility

A thread will be displayed as a chain of replies on clients unaware of threads.

> To ensure forward-compatibility on systems that do not support threads, clients
> are advised to attach the `m.thread` relation to replies that target an event
> containing a `m.thread` relation.

Reviewer 11: Continuing earlier threads from [here](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3440#discussion_r812093105), [here](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3440#discussion_r812890401), [here](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3440#pullrequestreview-892314077). (WHY, GITHUB, WHY?)

The first thing I'd ask is that you make it explicit whether you are talking about clients that *send* events or those that *receive* them. Per your most recent comment, it's about sending events, so let's try:

```suggestion
To ensure forward-compatibility on systems that do not support threads, clients
are advised to include the `m.thread` relation when sending replies to an event
containing a `m.thread` relation.
```

However, I still don't get this:
 * According to this paragraph, the intention is to improve compatibility with clients that do not support threads.
 * Such clients will not know how to interpret an `m.thread` relation
 * So why does an `m.thread` relation help?

I'm obviously missing something, but I just don't understand at all.

Reviewer 11: protip: click on the filename above the review comment:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1389908/156175422-0dbecf8a-cf09-4012-bd7b-b04d292354e0.png)

That goes to a page where you can reply, even if the comment is now "outdated".

Reviewer 7: > However, I still don't get this:
> 
> * According to this paragraph, the intention is to improve compatibility with clients that do not support threads.

Yes, maybe this paragraph should be moved from "Backward compatibility" to a section "Forward compatibility" to be less confusing. The intention is to improve "non"-supporting client's sending events into threads by half-supporting instead (i.e. support the trivial part).

> * Such clients will not know how to interpret an `m.thread` relation

- this is about sending an `m.thread` relation
- see above

> * So why does an `m.thread` relation help?

Forward compatibility if a client supports it without supporting threads fully. it is a trivial-to-implement base case on already existing reply feature without need to implement new views for threads etc. This stems from the threads-falling-back-to-replies consideration.

Reviewer 11: ok so where it says "do not support threads", it means "partial support for threads"?

This whole business of "we're going to support a subset of the feature" feels like it needs much clearer definition to me. There seems to be a lot of text in this MSC for supporting the subset, and it's never clearly defined how it works.

Reviewer 11: Notwithstanding my questions about how this is useful, or how it is meant to work, I at least finally understand what the paragraph is trying to say.

```suggestion
Clients that have *partial* support for threads are advised to include the `m.thread`
relation when sending replies to an event containing a `m.thread` relation.
```

Reviewer 11: Is this saying anything different to the "Sending m.thread before fully implementing threads" section?

Author: You're right, it's the same, will get rid of it here. Sorry for the confusion

Client-Server API with an HTTP `400` status code and a 
`M_UNKNOWN` error code.
Events received over federation should always be accepted without checking
the validity of the relations as it would break the extensibility of this proposal
in a future MSC.

This means that events with invalid thread relations can make their way into the
network, either due by malicious activity or buggy implementation. If a client
receives such events, it should hide them as soon as it can determine for certain
that the associated event is not a valid target.

Servers are expected to not filter out invalid `m.thread` relations from the results when
serving endpoints that deal with message relations. Clients that call those 
endpoints should be aware that they may return events with invalid relations, 
and deal with them appropriately.

### Client considerations

#### Sending `m.thread` before fully implementing threads

Clients that do not support threads yet should behave as followed when replying. 
It should set the `m.in_reply_to` part as usual, and then add on 
`"rel_type": "m.thread"` and `"event_id": "$thread_root"`, copying `$thread_root`
from the replied-to event.

> If a client does not include that relation type in the outgoing event, it should
> be treated as not being part of the thread.  For example, if a client has a

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
If the `m.thread` relation type is not present in an incoming event, it should
be treated as not being part of the thread.  For example, if a client has a
```

I think? But now it seems like a  null statement. Of course events without an `m.thread` should not be part of the thread. Is there more context here?

separate area for displaying threads, clients can render the event in the main
room timeline as a rich reply that will open and highlight the event in the
thread context when clicked.

> When replying to the following event, a client that does not support thread should 
> copy in `rel_type` and `event_id` properties in their reply mixin.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
When replying to the following event, a client that does not support threads should 
copy in `rel_type` and `event_id` properties in their reply mixin.
```

## Problem

Threading allows users to branch out a new conversation from the main timeline of a room
to each other. This is particularly useful in high traffic rooms where multiple 
conversations can happen in parallel or when a single discussion might stretch 
over a very long period of time.

The main goal of implementing threads is to facilitate conversations that are easier 
to follow and smoother to read.
Threading is very clearly a core requirement for any modern messaging 
solution, and Matrix uptake is suffering due to the lack of progress.

## Proposal

### Event format

A new relation type (see [MSC2674](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674))
`m.thread` expresses that an event belongs to a thread.

```json
"m.relates_to": {
  "rel_type": "m.thread",
  "event_id": "$thread_root"
}
```
Where $thread_root is the event ID of the root message in the thread.

When a thread root is aggregated (as in MSC2675), it returns a summary of the thread: 
the latest message, a list of participants and the total count of messages. 
I.e. in places which include bundled relations (per 
[MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675)), the thread root 

> would include additional information in the `unsigned` field:

Reviewer 11: presumably this is inside an `m.thread` field, which is itself under an `m.relations` field? see https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/blob/main/proposals/2675-aggregations-server.md#bundling:

> timeline events that have other events relate to them should include the aggregation of those related events in the `m.relations` property of their unsigned data.
> ...
> The bundled aggregations are grouped according to their relation type.

It might be best to fill out the example a bit more to clarify this, in the same way as the example at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/blob/main/proposals/2675-aggregations-server.md#bundling.

    "event_id": "ev1",
    "m.in_reply_to": {
        "event_id": "last_event_id_in_thread",
    }
  }
```

Historically replies have been limited to text messages due to the legacy fallback
prepended to `formatted_body`. This MSC is dependant on 
[MSC3676](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3676) which strips that 
requirement to unlock use of any event type in this context.

### Fetch all relations to a thread root

To fetch an entire thread, the `/relations` API can be used as defined in 
[MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675)

```
GET /_matrix/client/unstable/rooms/!room_id:domain/relations/$thread_root/m.thread
```

Where `$thread_root` is the event ID of the root message in the thread.

> Any API which receives events should bundle relations (apart from non-gappy 
incremental syncs), for instance: initial sync, gappy incremental sync, 
/messages and /context.

### Fetch all threads in a room

To fetch all threads in a room, the
[`/messages`](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/latest#get-matrix-client-r0-rooms-roomid-messages) 
API is used with newly added filtering options. It is proposed to expand the room

> event filtering to include filtering events by their related events:

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
event filtering to include filtering events by their relating events:
```

  },
  {
    "event_id": "ev3",
    // ...
    "m.relates_to": {
      "rel_type": "m.annotation",
      "event_id": "ev1",
      "key": "✅"
    }
  }
]
```

Given the above list of events, only `ev1` would be a valid target for an `m.thread`
relation event.

Servers should reject attempts to send events with invalid thread relations via the
Client-Server API with an HTTP `400` status code and a 
`M_UNKNOWN` error code.
Events received over federation should always be accepted without checking
the validity of the relations as it would break the extensibility of this proposal
in a future MSC.

This means that events with invalid thread relations can make their way into the
network, either due by malicious activity or buggy implementation. If a client
receives such events, they should hide them as soon as they can determine for certain
that the associated event is not a valid target.

Servers should not filter out invalid `m.thread` relations from the results when
serving endpoints that deal with message relations. Clients that call those 
endpoints should be aware that they may return events with invalid relations, 
and deal with them appropriately.

### Client considerations

> #### Sending `m.thread` before fully implementing threads

Reviewer 11: As discussed elsewhere - this is about a class of clients such as bridges that want to do their best to keep things in threads, but a regular threading UI is impossible or considered too heavyweight.

It's be great if this section could outline the usecase.

> #### Sending `m.thread` before fully implementing threads

Author: > I can't help but wonder how many clients are likely to do this

It's fairly quick to implement and I believe would really be beneficial for the overall ecosystem. This could be community contributed quite easily

  `rel_type` of `m.thread`.
* `count`: An integer counting the number of `m.thread` events
* `current_user_participated`: A flag set to `true` if the current logged in user
  has participated in the thread

#### Rich replies in a thread 

Rich replies are still handled via the `m.in_reply_to` field of `m.relates_to`.
However clients should fill in the new `hide_reply` property
in order to display that in a thread context.

```json
"m.relates_to": {
    "rel_type": "m.thread",
    "event_id": "$thread_root",
    "hide_reply": false,
    "m.in_reply_to": {
        "event_id": "$event_target"
    }
}
```

It is possible that an `m.in_reply_to` event targets an event that is outside the
related thread. Clients should always do their utmost to display the rich reply
and when clicked, the event should be displayed and highlighted in its original context.

A rich reply without `rel_type: m.thread` targeting a thread relation must be
rendered in the main timeline. This will allow users to advertise threaded messages
in the room.

### Backwards compatibility

A thread will be displayed as a chain of replies on clients unaware of threads.

> Thread-ready clients should always include an `m.in_reply_to` property when sending 
> a threaded event. It should always reference the latest message-like event in the 
> thread unless a user is explicitly replying to another event.
> The rich reply fallback should be displayed in a thread context unless it contains 
> the new `hide_reply` field as described in the previous section.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
Thread-ready clients should always include an `m.in_reply_to` property when sending 
a threaded event. It should always reference the latest message-like event in the 
thread unless a user is explicitly replying to another event (in which case `hide_reply`
should be set to `false`, as above).

The rich reply fallback should be ignored by thread-ready clients (ie, the
event should be displayed in a thread context) unless `hide_reply` is `false`.
```

Author: That's way clearer! thanks

#### Rich replies in a thread 

Rich replies are still handled via the `m.in_reply_to` field of `m.relates_to`.
However clients should fill in the new `hide_reply` property
in order to display that in a thread context.

```json
"m.relates_to": {
    "rel_type": "m.thread",
    "event_id": "$thread_root",
    "hide_reply": false,
    "m.in_reply_to": {
        "event_id": "$event_target"
    }
}
```

It is possible that an `m.in_reply_to` event targets an event that is outside the
related thread. Clients should always do their utmost to display the rich reply
and when clicked, the event should be displayed and highlighted in its original context.

A rich reply without `rel_type: m.thread` targeting a thread relation must be
rendered in the main timeline. This will allow users to advertise threaded messages
in the room.

### Backwards compatibility

A thread will be displayed as a chain of replies on clients unaware of threads.

Thread-ready clients should always include an `m.in_reply_to` property when sending 
a threaded event. It should always reference the latest message-like event in the 
thread unless a user is explicitly replying to another event (in which case `hide_reply`

> should be set to `false`, as above).

Reviewer: In practice this seems to be error prone. I don't know if it is the same client every time or different clients, but I have a lot of rooms that look like this (in various clients, this is Element Web):

![grafik](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/16312324/156948267-74e36686-0ee9-4f4d-be4f-f9311bd9f9c2.png)

Maybe this should be stricter on what events this should fallback to or alternatively it should just always default to the event, where the thread was started. At least in my experience all the threads I notice have this, but that is probably because the other threads look good, so I don't know what percentage of messages this applies to. But in practice I have noticed that multiple times in the last 1.5 months or so, so it might make sense to make this rule a bit stricter.

In the above case it was a reply to a redacted event, I think. In other cases it was a reply to reactions, poll replies or other hidden events.

OTOH, this could also just be a limitation we decide to live with, I just thought I'd mention it, since I saw it a lot recently.

Reviewer 7: FTR the screenshot says "[Unable to load event that was replied to, it either does not exist or you do not have permission to view it.](https://translate.element.io/translate/element-web/matrix-react-sdk/de/?checksum=c401b1e0f5512618&q=Das+Ereignis%2C+auf+das+geantwortet&sort_by=-priority%2Cposition)"

---

> default to the event, where the thread was started

I think that was done in the beginning and perceived as severely confusing, I'm sure you can find discussions higher up in this thread.

> In the above case it was a reply to a redacted event, I think.

I'd call this intentional behaviour in this case

> In other cases it was a reply to reactions, poll replies or other hidden events.

iirc there have been implementation bugs that would reply to such events in element before, but not anymore?

https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/blob/75f4cb2a3e17bda519a9999597c499ede7181cd5/proposals/3440-threading-via-relations.md?plain=1#L90

Imo, unless the spec has a section somewhere that defines a definite set of event types that are "message-like", it should name those specific events instead.

Reviewer: Well, yes, this specific event wasn't renderable because of the redaction, but I saw some as replies to polls last week. But I guess if those implementation bugs are fixed, that is fine, I just would have expected to run into those less often at this point.

Author: Yes, those implementation issues will be addressed and idea is that replies will only targets messages that can be rendered in a `ReplyTile` (no reactions, no edits, ...).
Which I believe resolves the conversation here. If you feel like some implementation bugs are not addressed correctly, I'd invite you to open an issue on the EW repo

Reviewer: Yeah, I think you can resolve this. Thinking back, most of those implementations are from before it was clarified in this MSC, so the effects of the stricter wording wouldn't have applied to those, where I am seeing the bugs now... :D

and deal with them appropriately.

### Client considerations

#### Sending `m.thread` before fully implementing threads

There will be clients that will not or can't support threads. Whether this is a
deliberate choice or because the system bridges to a platform that does not support
threads, there are a number of steps developer of those systems can take to ensure
continuity of conversation in the ecosystem.

Clients that do not offer a threading UI should behave as follows when replying, for
best interaction with those that do.
They should set the `m.in_reply_to` part as usual, and then add on 
`"rel_type": "m.thread"` and `"event_id": "$thread_root"`, copying `$thread_root`
from the replied-to event.

If the `m.thread` relation type is not present in an incoming event, it should
be treated as not being part of the thread.  For example, if a client has a
separate area for displaying threads, clients can render the event in the main
room timeline as a rich reply that will open and highlight the event in the
thread context when clicked.

When replying to the following event, a client that does not support threads should 

> copy in `rel_type` and `event_id` properties in their reply mixin.

Reviewer 7: Should a client that does not fully support threads set `"hide_reply": false` (or not include it at all, resulting in the same) to render such a forward compatible message as a reply within the thread? Is it left up to the client dev?

Reviewer 7: Okay, but that means in your opinion/proposal that in this case client that does not fully support threads set it to false or none and not true? I'm content either way, it's just not clear to me.

Reviewer 11: I think the current wording makes it fairly clear that the default is `true`:

> The rich reply fallback should be ignored by thread-ready clients (ie, the event should be displayed in a thread context) unless hide_reply is `false`.

If I were reading that, and there was no `hide_reply` property at all, I would decide it was *not* set to `false`, and would therefore ignore the fallback.

Reviewer 7: I can see your point, but I think there is also room to interpret it differently. I think what the current proposal tries to do is make this field required whenever there is a thread relation and everything else undefined behaviour. Then again I have very little experience implementing the matrix spec, so your word weighs heavier.

Reviewer 11: I spoke to @gsouquet and he suggested his intention was that `hide_reply` did indeed have a default of `false`. But I think this is all up in the air anyway, thanks to the other thread.

Author: Resolving this conversation has there was a parrallel one going on https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3440#discussion_r820310112 

And this has been dealt with as part of [`6d6baa2` (#3440)](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3440/commits/6d6baa262191dafaee7d3896ba6e0359db38fcf0)

* `current_user_participated`: A flag set to `true` if the current logged in user
  has participated in the thread

#### Rich replies in a thread 

Rich replies are still handled via the `m.in_reply_to` field of `m.relates_to`.
However clients should specify that this is not a thread fallback by setting
the `is_falling_back` property to `false`.

```json
"m.relates_to": {
    "rel_type": "m.thread",
    "event_id": "$thread_root",
    "is_falling_back": false,
    "m.in_reply_to": {
        "event_id": "$event_target"
    }
}
```

It is possible that an `m.in_reply_to` event targets an event that is outside the
related thread. Clients should always do their utmost to display the rich reply
and when clicked, the event should be displayed and highlighted in its original context.

A rich reply without `rel_type: m.thread` targeting a thread relation must be
rendered in the main timeline. This will allow users to advertise threaded messages
in the room.

### Backwards compatibility

A thread will be displayed as a chain of replies on clients unaware of threads.

Thread-ready clients should always include an `m.in_reply_to` property when sending 

> a threaded event. It should always reference the latest message-like event in the 
> thread. When sending the event, clients should also specify that `m.in_reply_to`
> is a fallback mechanism by setting the `is_falling_back` property to `true`.
> If omitted this property will default to `false` and client will treat the
> `m.in_reply_to` part of the event as a genuine reply and not as a fallback
> mechasnim anymore.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
a threaded event. Unless the user is explicitly replying to another event (see "Rich replies in a thread", above),
the `m.in_reply_to` property should reference the latest message-like event in the 
thread, and clients should also specify that `m.in_reply_to`
is a fallback mechanism (rather than a genuine reply) by setting the `is_falling_back` property to `true`.

(If omitted, `is_falling_back` defaults to `false`, and receiving clients will treat the
`m.in_reply_to` part of the event as a genuine reply.)
```

related thread. Clients should always do their utmost to display the rich reply
and when clicked, the event should be displayed and highlighted in its original context.

A rich reply without `rel_type: m.thread` targeting a thread relation must be
rendered in the main timeline. This will allow users to advertise threaded messages
in the room.

### Backwards compatibility

A thread will be displayed as a chain of replies on clients unaware of threads.

Thread-ready clients should always include an `m.in_reply_to` property when sending 
a threaded event. Unless the user is explicitly replying to another event (see "Rich replies in a thread", above),
the `m.in_reply_to` property should reference the latest message-like event in the 
thread, and clients should also specify that `m.in_reply_to`
is a fallback mechanism (rather than a genuine reply) by setting the `is_falling_back` property to `true`.

(If omitted, `is_falling_back` defaults to `false`, and receiving clients will treat the
`m.in_reply_to` part of the event as a genuine reply.)

```jsonc
"m.relates_to": {
    "rel_type": "m.thread",
    "event_id": "ev1",

>     "is_falling_back": true,

Reviewer: So one thing I noticed when looking at the push rules again: I expected this key to be in the "m.in_reply_to" relation, not on the thread relation. Is that intentional or not? Could this possibly be moved to the relation, that is actually falling back, so in this case the reply? Otherwise this seems to be a bit ambiguous.

Reviewer 14: Moving it at this point would mean having to handle it in both cases indefinitely to not break the semantics of existing history.

Reviewer: Well, the only consequence of that change would be that some old events would render with a reply. Considering the short timeframe that the use of m.thread has been legal and that this is not in any spec release yet and won't be for 3 months, I think fixing that now would be the much, much smaller pain point. Clients could accept both for a few months in the transition period and after that old threads might have some extra replies in them, but since they are still marked as beta, that will be justifyable. If we don't fix it, we will have to introduce a new field to mark other relations as fallbacks in the future, which will be then something we will actually have to have compatibility with for years.

So no, I don't agree we would need to handle that indefinitely. Implementing a feature before it is in a spec release has some risk and the problems with that will be minimal. I can write an MSC for that though, if it is something we need to argue about.

Reviewer: I wrote an MSC instead: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3825

}
```

* `latest_event`: The most recent event which relates to this event, with 
  `rel_type` of `m.thread`.
* `count`: An integer counting the number of `m.thread` events
* `current_user_participated`: A flag set to `true` if the current logged in user
  has participated in the thread

#### Rich replies in a thread 

Rich replies are still handled via the `m.in_reply_to` field of `m.relates_to`.
However clients should fill in the new `m.display_reply_fallback` property

> in order to display that in a thread context.

Reviewer 11: you've given some instructions about when `m.display_reply_fallback` should be set, but there doesn't seem to be a clear definition of what it actually means.

Please could you add a paragraph which gives a distinct paragraph defining what this property means.

(I'm still not really following this. If it's always `true`, what's the point of it?)

Reviewer: > (I'm still not really following this. If it's always true, what's the point of it?)

It's false, when it is not present. So by default replies are not shown, only when this property is added.

Author: I have now changed that property name to be `hide_reply`.

Thread events always send `m.in_reply_to` alongside the thread relation, however it's not always desirable to display that reply tile. It only displayed when a user gave intent that they wish to reply to a message (by clicking the reply button for example), in other cases we should have `hide_reply` set to `false`

```json
"m.relates_to": {
    "rel_type": "m.thread",
    "event_id": "$thread_root",

>     "m.display_reply_fallback": true,

Reviewer 11: contrary to the bad example set by `m.in_reply_to`, there is no need for namespacing in this object.

    "content": { ... },
    ...
  },
  "count": 7,

>   "currentUserParticipated": true

Reviewer 3: We seem to be mixing underscores and camelcase in this API, can we change this to `current_user_participated`? (And please update the paragraph defining what this is!)

#### Rich replies in a thread 

Rich replies are still handled via the `m.in_reply_to` field of `m.relates_to`.
However clients should fill in the new `hide_reply` property

> in order to display that in a thread context.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
However clients should set the new `hide_reply` property to `false`,
in order to distinguish this as a "genuine" reply to a threaded message,
rather than a regular threaded message which is using the `m.in_reply_to`
field as a fallback (see "Backwards compatibility" below).
```

... if my understanding is correct?

Reviewer 7: If I understand correctly, sending `hide_reply: none` (i.e. not including the field?) would be falsey. Thus "genuine reply to a threaded message" is the default? Seems like it should be reverse (i.e. name it `show_reply` and invert the semantics), so it can be left out in the default case.

I believe this is what richvdh asked earlier:
> (I'm still not really following this. If it's always true, what's the point of it?)

and deepbluev7 explained:
> It's false, when it is not present. So by default replies are not shown, only when this property is added.

which would match the default behaviour i would expect. I don't follow why it was changed.

Reviewer 11: yeahhh, I'm not really following why this is this way round, either. A property that defaults to `true` is unintuitive at best.

For links: the conversation about changing it was at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3440/files/89c4b5e4b65eef20e8d8a9e971bceba17a5e60fa#diff-113727ce0257b4dc0ad6f1087b6402f2cfcb6ff93272757b947bf1ce444056aeR59. Something something notifications?

Reviewer: If it says "show_reply", then this property not being present, I would assume the reply to not be shown. But this does not apply to threads. So now the rule is:

- if is thread and has "show_reply: true" or is not thread, treat as a reply

If you use "hide_reply", it is:

- Unless "hide_reply: true", treat it as a reply.

It just makes no sense to me to override thread specific defaults in a different message. It weirdly mixes concerns. If you explicitly add to a reply, that this reply is just a fallback, in a reply relation push rule you can opt out of applying the notification rule, when a specific field is set. If your default depends on a different relation being present... you now need a more complex rule. I've been thinking on how to apply the MSC #3664 rule to threads and that's the conclusion I came to. But I am open to other suggestions. fallbacks are just a mess and I don't think there are good fallbacks, just some are less bad than others :D

Author: In regards to the naming, this is pretty much what @deepbluev7 explain [in his message above](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3440#discussion_r820042177).

I'm not entirely certain what you're suggesting to do in regards to [MSC3664](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3664)? Could you clarify that bit.
The sentence "It just makes no sense to me to override thread specific defaults in a different message." is what throws me off a bit, as far as I understand an event source contains all the informations one needs. In what scenario would you have to inspect another event? Or am I getting the wrong end of the stick here?

Reviewer 11: I for one am getting confused here, so as much for my own reference as anything else, let me try to enumerate the possibilities. I think there are actually two questions here. One is whether we have a property `hide_reply` or `show_reply`; the other is what the *default* for that property is if it is unspecified.

So, the four combinations are:

 1. `hide_reply`, default value `true`: normal threaded messages leave the property unset (or, equivalently, set `hide_reply: true`); genuine replies-within-thread are sent with `hide_reply: false`. This is what the proposal wording implies as of this writing.
 2. `hide_reply`, default value `false`: normal threaded messages explictly set `hide_reply: true`; genuine replies-within-thread leave the property unset  (or, equivalently, set `hide_reply: false`)
 3. `show_reply`, default value `true`: normal threaded messages explictly set `show_reply: false`; genuine replies-within-thread leave the property unset (or, equivalently, set `show_reply: true`)
 4. `show_reply`, default value `false`: normal threaded messages leave the property unset (or, equivalently, set `show_reply: false`); genuine replies-within-thread are sent with `show_reply: true`. This is, effectively, what the proposal wording said before 9159a5a7381a1ba5a7416e78a2a8d80c5a4cffd5.

Of those,

 * options 1 and 3 bring the disadvantage of a property whose *default* value is true - which is to say, `undefined` (a falsey value) has different behaviour to `false`.
 * options 2 and 3 bring the disadvantage that we have to include the property in the common case of "normal" threaded messages.

TL;DR: I don't understand what was wrong with option 4.

Reviewer 11: @deepbluev7 said:

> If it says "show_reply", then this property not being present, I would assume the reply to not be shown. But this does not apply to threads. So now the rule is:
> 
>  * if is thread and has "show_reply: true" or is not thread, treat as a reply
>
> If you use "hide_reply", it is:
>
>  * Unless "hide_reply: true", treat it as a reply.

This isn't a fair comparison, on two fronts:

* You seem to be assuming that the default value for `hide_reply`, if unspecified, is `false` (ie, option 2 above) - which is not what is proposed.
* You're only showing half the logic for the `hide_reply` case. The full logic could be more accurately spelt out:
   * If there is a  `"rel_type": "m.thread"` relation type, *and* if `hide_reply: false`, treat it as a thread
   * Otherwise, if there is a `"m.in_reply_to"` property, treat it as a reply.

And, like @gsouquet says, I really don't understand what "override thread specific defaults in a different message" means.

Reviewer 7: Ah, I thought the current MSC proposes variant 2, because not including a value in a JSON object implies that it is `none` and `none == false`. In my understanding it is *not* a case of `if hide_reply == none then hide_reply = true`. Either way it appears to not be totally clear which one it is.

Reviewer 11: >  So you just need to look at the reply relation to render a reply. 

That's only true if you want to treat in-thread replies the same as out-of-thread replies, which seems a big assumption. (As you note: it only matters at all if you are a thread-enabled client, in which case, I'd expect you to render in-thread replies in-thread.)

Reviewer: > That's only true if you want to treat in-thread replies the same as out-of-thread replies, which seems a big assumption.

It also matters for all middleware, like pushrules (server and client side), parsers that return a more structured format, reply relation caching for other uses and possibly other stuff. Now all of that needs to know about threads and look at more properties than what they can find in the reply relation.

Reviewer 11: > Now all of that needs to know about threads and look at more properties than what they can find in the reply relation

I thought the whole point of the fallback was that things that didn't implement threads could just interpret everything as a reply. I'm not following why those things need to know about threads, or why they need to worry about `hide_reply` or `show_reply`.

Reviewer: You do not actually want all of them to treat the fallback as replies. Otherwise you get noisy notifications randomly, because some client picked your message as the target for the fallback. In most cases you want to know if this is a fallback for something or not, when you have some consideration for threading.

Reviewer 6: TLDR: 

We should use option 4, but consider renaming it to be less rendering-focused and more fallback-focused. Eg: `is_falling_back: true/false`, default `true`.

Strong opinion is that double negatives aren't something we should support. Naming is less concerning to me, but still important enough to leave an essay's worth of text here.

Added context follows.

----

From the discussion, I'm quite fond of option 4 from vdh's comment. Ideally if the relation format was a bit more structured then the information could be presented differently, however in the interest of just getting the thing landed I'd really prefer if we didn't open up that box. Specifically, if `m.thread` was an object under `m.relates_to` then the `*_reply` flag would be more clearly in reference to the thread rather than the relationship/reply.

However, we do have precedence for additional fields which vary depending on the `rel_type`: aggregations and it's `key`. Including a `key` in the relationship for any event isn't *wrong*, just *pointless*. A rendering hint for replies would be the same thing: only apply when `rel_type` is `m.thread`. Otherwise it'd just not make sense (`show_reply: false` on a non-thread? what?).

The other benefit of `show` is that it avoids a double negative. Double negatives are notoriously difficult to maintain in any case because they cause the reader (developer) to have to actually think through the problem instead of intuitively knowing what is going on. Plus, a double negative will eternally cause support questions in dev rooms, cause occasional bugs, and be subject to endless clarifications in the spec text. None of this is the end of the world, but it sets a precedent that I'm not exactly comfortable with as one of the people who will be on the receiving end of the implied feedback this brings.

"show/hide" terminology might be too difficult to parse, and we can look at alternative names. As mentioned, intuitive naming is important and it could be confusing to non-thread-aware clients to see `show/hide_reply: bool` next to what looks like a reply, even if the intent is to associate the field with the `rel_type` instead of the reply. Such alternative name could be `is_falling_back: false` (to hint that it should be rendered as a reply) or `is_reply: false` (by default, to indicate that the structure isn't a reply in the traditional sense). Either alternative would be fine, I think, and still convey the exact intent we're trying to communicate. Worst case is someone Ctrl+F's for the field in the spec and finds out it's "threads stuff".

Further, I think it's actually more important to consider the non-client event consumers in the wild as slightly more important than clients themselves. Specifically because "hide/show" terminology isn't as clear in a bridge context (it's not rendering anything, per-say), and bridges/bots tend to debug/develop with `println` dumps of events rather than following a schema<sup>[1]</sup>. Clients will be able to figure out pretty much any field with relative ease, making it an equally easy bikeshed on naming, but bridges/bots would likely be more appreciative of a signal which indicates whether it's a fallback or not.

So all told I'd strongly advocate that we steer clear of double negatives as a matter of policy/principle. I'm less concerned with the actual field name, but would highlight all mentions of the word "intuitive" in my comment here for others to take into consideration on their part.

---

<sup>[1] this is because it's generally more practical to see what is actually being sent over the wire rather than the "ideal conditions" of the spec. For example, it's sometimes safe to rely on `body` being markdown if the usecase expects a specific client to be in the environment - the spec says it's plain text, but the client sends markdown. Might as well use it.</sup>

Reviewer 11: @turt2live wrote:

> We should use option 4, but consider renaming it to be less rendering-focused and more fallback-focused. Eg: `is_falling_back: true/false`, default `true`.

errm. So to be clear, we have:

Normal threaded messages leave the property unset (or, equivalently, set `is_falling_back: true`); genuine replies-within-thread are sent with `is_falling_back: true`?

That sounds like option 1 on my list to me, with a simple s/`hide_reply`/`is_falling_back`/ ?

(which is good in that it brings you into alignment with @deepbluev7, I think. But bad in that I'm not enthusiastic about properties with `true` defaults.)

For the record: I too am not enthusiastic about the double-negative, and I think that it's good to describe the properties of the event rather than attempting to give the client instructions about how to render it - so `is_falling_back` is a better name. But my desire to avoid properties with `true` defaults outweighs my desire to avoid double negatives.

Reviewer 11: @deepbluev7 wrote:

> You do not actually want all of them to treat the fallback as replies. Otherwise you get noisy notifications randomly, because some client picked your message as the target for the fallback. In most cases you want to know if this is a fallback for something or not, when you have some consideration for threading.

Ok, I think I finally understand what you're trying to say.

If we use `show_reply`, and you're trying to write a pushrule that captures actual replies, then you have to check for:

```
event["m.relates_to"]["m.in_reply_to"] && (!event["m.relates_to"]["m.thread"] || event["m.relates_to"]["show_reply"])
```

Whereas with `hide_reply` (or, equivalently, `is_falling_back`) it is simpler:

```
event["m.relates_to"]["m.in_reply_to"] && !event["m.relates_to"]["hide_reply"]
```

Reviewer 11: Looking at all this again, I feel like we could satisfy all parties with a modified option 2:

* `is_falling_back`, default value **`false`**: normal threaded messages explictly set `is_falling_back: true`; genuine replies-within-thread leave the property unset (or, equivalently, set `is_falling_back: false`).

(which is apparently what @gsouquet intended - I misinterpreted the proposal)

The pushrules logic for a genuine reply is then:

```
event["m.relates_to"]["m.in_reply_to"] && !event["m.relates_to"]["is_falling_back"]
```

... and yes, it brings the overhead of including  `is_falling_back: true` on most threaded messages, but I feel like that's a relatively small price.

@gsouquet, @turt2live, @HarHarLinks, @deepbluev7: thoughts?

Author: I'd be happy with that. It looks like this addresses all concerns, and has a more explicit naming.

Reviewer: Yeah, I'm happy with that. My issue was mostly that parenthesized or conditions are a bit cumbersome to express in pushrules. I don't care about the name.

Reviewer 6: I'm fine enough with that. Not too thrilled about having to specify it constantly on events, but not enough to block the MSC from moving forward.

In fact, I'd actually encourage us to not have a default and instead make the field required for threads. It'll be on 90% of events anyhow.

A thread will be displayed as a chain of replies on clients unaware of threads.

To ensure forward-compatiblity on systems that do not support threads, clients

> are advised to attach the `m.thread` relation to replies that are target an event

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
are advised to attach the `m.thread` relation to replies that target an event
```
I think?

A thread will be displayed as a chain of replies on clients unaware of threads.

To ensure forward-compatibility on systems that do not support threads, clients
are advised to attach the `m.thread` relation to replies that target an event

> containing a `m.thread` relation.

Reviewer 11: Github isn't allowing me to reply to the [earlier comment](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3440#discussion_r812093105) here, but basically this is still really confusing.

However, I think I might see the source of confusion. When you say "clients are advised to attach the `m.thread` relation", I assume that means "when a client *sends* a reply to a threaded event, it should include an `m.thread` relation" (which is kinda obvious, but anyway).

But do you actually mean: "when a client *receives* a reply to a threaded event, it should behave as if there was an `m.thread` relation even if there is not one"?

Reviewer 11: -> https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3440/files#r816753654

API is used with newly added filtering options. It is proposed to expand the room
event filtering to include filtering events by their related events:

* `relation_types`: A list of relation types to include. An event `A` is included 
in the filter only if there exists another event `B` which relates to `A` with a 
`rel_type` which is defined in the list
* `relation_senders`: A list of senders to include. An event `A` is included in 
the filter only if there exists another event `B` which relates to `A` with a 

> `sender` which is defined in the list

Reviewer 3: > would it be a big job to rename them?

It should be fine to name the stable ones whatever we want.

And yes, those sound like better names.

* `A`: a `m.room.message` event sent by `alice`
* `B`: a `m.room.message` event sent by `bob` which relates to `A` with type `m.thread`

Using a filter of `"related_by_rel_types": ["m.thread"]` would return event `A` as it
has another event which relates to it via `m.thread`.

Similarly, using a filter of `"related_by_senders": ["bob"]` would return event `A`
as it has another event which relates to it sent by `bob`.

### Server capabilities

Threads might have sporadic support across servers, to simplify feature 

> detections for clients, a homeserver must advertise unstable support for threads.
> As part of the `/versions` API
> 

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
detections for clients, a homeserver must advertise unstable support for threads
as part of the `/versions` API:
```

Given the above list of events, only `ev1` would be a valid target for an `m.thread`
relation event.

Servers should reject attempts to send events with invalid thread relations via the
Client-Server API with an HTTP `400` status code and a 
`M_UNKNOWN` error code.
Events received over federation should always be accepted without checking
the validity of the relations as it would break the extensibility of this proposal
in a future MSC.

This means that events with invalid thread relations can make their way into the
network, either due by malicious activity or buggy implementation. If a client

> receives such events, they should hide them as soon as they can determine for certain

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
receives such events, it should hide them as soon as it can determine for certain
```

that the associated event is not a valid target.

Servers should not filter out invalid `m.thread` relations from the results when
serving endpoints that deal with message relations. Clients that call those 
endpoints should be aware that they may return events with invalid relations, 
and deal with them appropriately.

### Client considerations

#### Sending `m.thread` before fully implementing threads

> Clients that do not support threads yet should copy the `m.thread` relation of the

Reviewer 7: What do you mean by "copy the m.thread relation", what it "the relation" here, is it the whole m.relates_to?
Because this is how you define it above
```jsonc
"m.relates_to": {
    "rel_type": "m.thread",
    "event_id": "$thread_root",
    "m.in_reply_to": {
        "event_id": "last_event_id_in_thread",
    }
  }
```
When replying as is this scenario, the client should set the m.in_reply_to part as usual, and then add on `"rel_type": "m.thread"` and `"event_id": "$thread_root"`, copying `$thread_root` from the replied-to event.

I think this is probably what you intend to say, but not stated in an unmistakable way. If it is not what you meant, then I think it should be as I described since that behaviour is almost trivial to implement.

> Clients that do not support threads yet should copy the `m.thread` relation of the

Reviewer 11: If clients don't support threads, how will they know to copy the `m.thread` relation?

#### Sending `m.thread` before fully implementing threads

There will be clients that will not or can't support threads. Whether this is a
deliberate choice or because the system bridges to a platform that does not support
threads, there are a number of steps developer of those systems can take to ensure
continuity of conversation in the ecosystem.

Clients that do not offer a threading UI should behave as follows when replying, for
best interaction with those that do.
They should set the `m.in_reply_to` part as usual, and then add on 
`"rel_type": "m.thread"` and `"event_id": "$thread_root"`, copying `$thread_root`
from the replied-to event.

If the `m.thread` relation type is not present in an incoming event, it should

> be treated as not being part of the thread.  For example, if a client has a

Reviewer 11: I still feel like I'm missing something here. I mean, if there is no `m.thread` relation type, then *obviously* it's not part of a thread, right?

Author: Yes, I guess this is probably a left-over of a time where we were considering making associated `m.in_reply_to` events part of the thread.
Will delete

#### Sending `m.thread` before fully implementing threads

> Clients that do not support threads yet should behave as followed when replying. 

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
Clients that do not support threads yet should behave as follows when replying. 
```

> It should set the `m.in_reply_to` part as usual, and then add on 

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
They should set the `m.in_reply_to` part as usual, and then add on 
```

  in the `RoomEventFilter`
  * `io.element.show_reply` should be used in place of `is_falling_back`

While this MSC is considered stable, but not in v1.3 of the specification, clients
should look for `org.matrix.msc3440.stable` as an unstable feature flag as part of

> the `/versions` API response to determine server support for the stable identifiers.

Reviewer 6: just to ack this here too: we (the SCT) are actively committing to v1.3 having threads, so are okay with this.
